Hello and welcome to our lecture on solid state computing. We've got a lot to cover.
At the end of the previous lecture we were talking about the classes and how the tube
was replacing the relay in digital applications and now we're going to talk about the transistor,
its invention and how eventually it replaces tubes in digital applications because the
transistor is faster, less heat, reliable, so many things. We're going to talk about
amplifiers, tubes and transistors but it's complicated. Transistor radios were made possible
by transistors but audiophiles still like their tubes. We'll talk about that in a bit.
We're going to talk about how over time we got better and better at manufacturing transistors
and their underlying transistor technology has changed over time and so the way we think
about this is we create this concept of a digital logic gate which is an abstraction
which is the same and the underlying transistor technology for a digital logic gate can be
very different but the way we think about digital logic gates is the way we can, it's
irrespective of the underlying technology or manufacturing technology. And then transistors
increased in density and scale and eventually we will learn about very large scale integration,
VLSI and learn how we lay out chips and how to manufacture them and just play with that
just a little bit. But let's start at the beginning with vacuum tubes, right? So the
Colossus used valves, the more British way to call it is valves and I think that to some
degree valves is a good way to think about it because it is sort of a remote control
valve that sort of allows less or more electricity through a particular thing based on an input
value. And its initial design was to design analogs, amplify signals, things like long
distance phone calls. You know you have a microphone and a thousand miles away there's
a speaker or a hundred miles away there's a speaker. And so the problem is the amount
of voltage that a microphone would generate is just not enough to get through hundreds
of miles of wires. So about every ten miles you needed a power supply and an amplifier
where the wires would come off, down off of the poles, get amplified, be put back up on
the poles. And the tube is a relatively old concept. It was invented in 1912 by Dr. Lee
DeForest. So let me show you close up a couple things about tubes and relays because the
Colossus really was the transition from tubes to relays. This is a relay and in this device
there's a series of inputs, inputs and outputs and there's a bunch of switches but then there's
a control input and output and the control input and output is what I'm going to be playing
with. Control input and output. So I'm going to be putting electricity on the control input
and what you've got is a spring that keeps contacts one way and then an electromagnet
that pulls the contacts another way. So I've got a little tiny DC power supply. It's a
simple little DC power supply. It's pretty safe. And I'm going to activate this and so
right now the contacts, right there, the contacts are one way and when I activate this the contacts
click to the other way. You can kind of see the contacts moving back and forth and you
can think of that as a zero and a one and on things like the Bomba we use these kinds
of relays to capture zeros and ones and you can even use these eventually to do addition.
The problem with relays and why tubes are better is how fast can you move this back and forth,
right? It's like I'm a video gamer pushing the keys as fast as I can. The problem is is because
there is inertia, there's a spring, and there's physics. There's only a certain amount of speed
that you can get to it and so ultimately tubes don't make a clicking noise. Anything that's
physical digital makes a clicking noise. So I'm going to connect this and keep this connected
and show you one more thing. So now this is energized and I'll turn my voltage down to zero.
So now it's a zero, now it's a one, now it's a zero. But I don't know if you're hearing it,
I'll try to make it so you can hear it even better. There's a moment where this device,
the physics is confused. The amount of voltage going through the electromagnet is not strong
enough to override the little spring at the top. There's a spring right there and so you see that
it's fighting, okay? So the electromagnet and the spring are fighting and let me make the
electromagnet and the spring fight and what you'll see at the bottom here is you'll see this kind of
bouncing back and forth and from a from a digital perspective it's bouncing back and forth from zero
to one. So here I'm going to start it and as I move it up slowly you may not be able to see the
movement but you probably can hear the movement. It is just fighting and it's going back and forth
and it's neither zero nor one at this point. If I go up higher then it will then it switches
and it stops and that transition is an important part of turning analog devices
into digital devices because we have to compensate for that. We have to make sure
that whatever voltage it is that leaves this in an intermediate state halfway between zero and one
is something we compensate for with logic outside of this device. So here I have some consumer
packaging and in the 1950s and the 1960s we would have radios and televisions in our homes and we
would have to go to the store and buy new tubes when the tubes broke down. So this tube that I
showed you before actually has a number. Its number is 6CGAA and after this I will show you the spec
that you can still read online for that. The other thing that's interesting is the packaging. It's a
little paper but it was designed for you to go to the store and to be able to bring home this somewhat
fragile device and not break it. So here is the tube I showed you before and we'll look at the
specification and you'll see the pins. There's nine pins. It talks about the height and you'll
see a bunch of graphs as compared to if you put certain amounts of electricity and voltage on
certain pins then certain things happen and so there's a whole bunch of graphs. So later I'll
start telling you talking to you about those graphs in the abstract. Here are the specifications of the
6CGAA. It has nine inputs. It's about 2.1 inches tall and you can see which inputs go to the grid,
which inputs go to the heater, and which inputs go to the output voltage that then is the amplified
output voltage. We have these physical devices, these digital tubes, and their original purpose
was to do amplification and to do amplification well you want a nice smooth transition as your
input voltage is increased. You want a smooth transition for your output voltage. You want the
output voltage to be higher but you also want it to be smooth because you're trying to do an
amplification and so the right curve has a nice sort of 45 degree angle linear sloped amplification.
The problem is that when you have such a long time before it kind of goes from the low voltage to the
high voltage that makes the transition period too long. So there's a voltage range that's a zero,
there's a voltage range that's transition, and then there's a voltage range that is one.
So by changing the sizes of things and resistance etc you can build a valve that is not as good of
an audio amplifier but more suitable for digital and what you want to do is you want to take the
transition period from sort of zero to one and make that more narrow meaning that it goes quickly
from quiet to loud in a sense more quickly than you'd want for a real amplifier and you kind of
want it at the one-third point right so you as the input voltage goes from zero to the one-third
point it's kind of zero and then there's a short transition but by the time it gets to like half
of the input voltage the output is a one so you know you could the input could be from 0.1.2.3.4.5
but by the time the input voltage is halfway to one the output voltage is one and this allows for
what we call regeneration so if a circuit has an output that we want to be a zero or one and we
want that to be an input to another circuit then we can regenerate that so you might get like 0.7
coming from a previous circuit and then want it to be one going into the next circuit and so the
idea is you tune these things so they go up quickly and to some degree early so that we get
through a fast transition stage and a long regeneration stage so that you always can
can predictably have a zero or a one even with a very analog device so valves as we've talked they
take a lot of power they generate a lot of heat most of the tubes have heaters inside them that
made it easier for the the electrons to come off the cathode they're physically large you know how
many gigabytes can you put you can't you know 100 bytes would be large to to build with tubes
they're expensive and complex to manufacture because they're made of glass they have tiny
little wires in them that are hard to manufacture and put together and they have to be a vacuum
they do have a soft electronic glow in the dark the soft electronic glow in the dark is
to some an advantage and of course from a technology and electronics perspective
when we think about computers they're at disadvantage so up next we're going to talk about
the semiconductors which begin to address some of the disadvantages of valves slash vacuum tubes.